---
title: 'Milestone 1: Ideation'
date: 2022/05/30
description: 'Ideation: problem motivation, proposed core features, and user stories, along with a 1-month roadmap'
tag: milestone
---

import Authors from '@/components/Authors'

# Milestone 1: Ideation

<div className="text-sm mt-2 text-center text-gray-500 dark:text-gray-400">
  Monday, May 30th, 2022
</div>

<Authors authors={['khang', 'weiseng']} />

<div className="flex justify-center mt-8">

[Repository][repo] · [Documentation][docs] · [Proof of Concept][web]

</div>

## Problem

6000+ modules to choose from, but each student is only going to do 40+
each. There are many ways to go about completing the same degree.

Module relations are complicated. Students don't immediately know what
modules unlock what set of modules.

## Target audience

All NUS undergraduates, and possibly pre-university students.

## Motivation

### General target audience

When you're stuck not knowing what mods to take next semester, or just
want general recommendations about what modules to take, your current
alternatives are friends, seniors and perhaps the NUSMods Planner.

Many may have reached the point where either they don't know what
modules they are eligible for, or they lose track of what modules are
required for them to graduate. This problem is made worse by the
ever-changing graduation requirements, so reaching out to seniors may
not be helpful at all.

Some students start a new semester not having enough module choices as
a result of not taking enough prerequisites, forcing them to take
unrelated modules for the upcoming semester.

### Students considering specializations/double degree/major/minor

Some students might be interested in multiple different
specializations, and they might not be sure what to pick. The overhead
of having to keep track of what modules are completed for a certain
specialization makes it troublesome to consider different
specializations.

---

## Core features

Instead of planning out your future modules in a bullet list or a
checkbox list, you put them out on a graph. On this graph, nodes are
the modules you take, and the edges are the relations between these
modules (requirements / pre-requisite).

You can plan out a degree path by drawing out a graph.

To find out what modules you can take after a module placed down,
simply click on it to see top suggestions.

To find out overall what modules to do next, you can click on a
floating action button that will always be at the bottom right corner.
Modtree will intelligently suggest to you the top 5 modules for you to
do next. This suggestion will be such that you're on track to
completing your degree while keeping the most options open to you
based on the pre-requisites that these suggested modules fulfil.

---

## User stories

### Current undergrad not sure what to choose at ModReg

He can go on modtree and draw up a graph of the modules he's already
taken, and fill in his current degree requirements. Modtree will then
be able to suggest to him what to do next in order to keep his options
the most open (i.e. the modules that satisfy the most number of other
module's pre-requisites).

### Current undergrad thinking of switching majors

He can fill in his current degree requirements, and then also the
requirements of the degree he's thinking of switching to. He can then
draw out multiple graphs to try and see how his current modules done
fits into either degree. Of course, he can also create, save, and even
duplicate graphs as he modifies them, preventing the need to write
everything from scratch.

### Current undergrad unsure of how to fit in desired modules into

their curriculum

Some modules are offered during particular semesters, and they could
be pre-requisites for other desired modules. By building a degree in
modtree and drawing up a graph, modtree will calculate the latest
semester that the pre-requisite must be taken, in order to take the
desired module before graduation.

### Current undergrad wants to see if it is possible to graduate

before the expected date

Some students might want to graduate in less than 4 years, or they
might be double degree students who want to graduate within 4 years.
By indicating the desired graduation date, modtree will assist in
creating an overall degree plan, so the student knows how much and
when to overload, and which modules to prioritize, so that there is no
issue in clearing pre-requisites in time.

---

## Roadmap

The bulk of our progress in Milestone 1 is in our database functions.
We chose to focus development here at the start because we wanted a
solid foundation to build things from.

With this solid foundation, in Milestone 2 we aim to push for more
frontend development to make use of our database functions. In
particular, we will be implementing the features mentioned in the next
section. By the end of Milestone 2, users should be able to interact
with the graph of a degree plan, such as adding modules and getting
suggestions. They should also have access to user settings. As of
Milestone 2, we do not intend to allow users to customize their degree
plan yet. This will be implemented in Milestone 3, unless we have
sufficient time before Milestone 2. For this reason, we will likely
fix the degree plan to be that of Computer Science for all users.

In Milestone 3, apart from being able to customize degree plans, we
aim to push for social features in modtree. This includes having a
friends list, and being able to see and make use of all users' public
degree templates. We will also be offering module details' pages and
comments on these pages. Additionally, we will implement admin
functionality, to allow admins to hide comments, and also to create
official degree templates for students to use.

---

## Features for the next milestone

### Module suggestions (for a single module)

By clicking on a module's node in the graph, the user will get
recommended what modules to take next, based on the importance of
completing a module, and their degree requirements. Core modules would
have the highest priority, and within core modules, the one that
unlocks more modules will have a higher priority. For example, having
completed CS1101S, a possible priority ranking would be CS2030S >
CS2100 > CS2107. Here, CS2107 is ranked the lowest among the three
because it is not a core module, unlike CS2030S and CS2100. Next,
CS2030S is ranked higher because it unlocks more modules than CS2100.

### Module suggestions (overall)

By clicking on a button on the graph page, the user will get
recommended what modules to take next, based on all modules completed
(instead of just one), and their degree requirements. This is an
extension of the above feature.

### Insert modules into graph

Users should be able to insert modules into the graph by

- Dragging in an entry from the search results
- Clicking on an entry in the search results
- Double-clicking on a suggested module

### Classify and style modules according to type

With more modules taken, the user's graph can get complicated, so we
will style the module nodes according to the status (Taken, Taking,
Plan to take) or (Core, Elective, UE). The choice of the
classification will be an option for the user. On top of helping users
visualize their graph better, this classification will also help to
identify which modules can be swapped for other modules if necessary.

### Various alerts to inform user that certain degree planning choices

might not be desirable

1. When a core module is removed, the degree cannot be completed.
   Thus, a warning is shown to the user that they are removing a core
   module.
2. When a pre-requisite for a core module is removed (same scenario as
   1.
3. When a selected module may not be helpful to user's degree
   completion

### User profile page

We will have a user profile page to allow the user to view/edit their
basic information related to their profile (email, display name). They
will also be able to view/add new degrees/graphs. We also intend to
support different color schemes, and the user will be able to change
color schemes on this page. This is modelled after Github's user
profile page.

### User settings page

On the settings page, the user will be able to change their password.

### Add module exemptions to a user

Many students have module exemptions like for ES1103 or for MA1301.
These modules are not actually taken so it would be strange to see it
in the graph, so they will add these modules to a list of exemptions.

---

## Key technologies used

The frontend is written in TypeScript. Aside from all the libraries
contained within frontend, it speaks to the backend using
authenticated HTTP requests.

The backend is also written in TypeScript. It takes requests from the
frontend and sends a response that is generally in JSON format. Given
the right authentication token, it can be accessed by anyone.
Therefore, it is not a requirement that users interact with our data
only through our default frontend. They can create their own
apps/scripts if they want to.

The database runs on Postgres. It only talks to the backend and will
not be exposed publicly in any way. The backend sends commands to it
through an ORM, for which we use TypeORM in particular.

Since all services link back to using TypeScript, we have one source
of truth for all types defined in this project. This is made possible
by structuring the source code as a monorepo, where all services read
from one central source of truth for the types. Similarly, code
linting and formatting rules are all read from one base set of rules.

The overall decision to stick to TypeScript as much as possible is a
time-saving decision, since it's relatively high level and easy to
write. If we had ample resources for this project, we would have
chosen a faster language that supports parallel execution natively,
such as Golang or Rustlang for the backend, and write custom database
functions in SQL directly.

---

## Software engineering practices

### Keys

No API keys are exposed on our public repo. We use `.env` files to
safe-keep our keys, and we only commit an `.env.example` file to show
what keys we're expecting a developer to have.

### Unit tests

To enable major code refactoring should the need arise, it's far more
comforting to have a reliable set of unit tests to let you know that
your code does in fact still perform in the same way as it used to.

### Continuous Integration

Unit tests are ran on every key event. Pushes to particular branches,
whenever a pull request is opened, whenever someone requests for a PR
review, etc. Test results are also sent to a telegram group so that we
don't have to check Github Actions all the time.

### Continuous Delivery

Frontend, backend, and documentation deployments are automatic. If
certain particular branches are pushed to, a deployment would
automatically trigger.

### Branch protection rules

master and dev branches require all CI checks to pass before being
able to merge. This helps ensure a higher base level for the standard
of production code.

[youtube]: https://youtu.be/Nx2Jnj8cCcA
[poster]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/modtree/modtree/5012.png
[repo]: https://github.com/modtree/modtree
[docs]: https://modtree-docs.vercel.app
[web]: https://modtree.vercel.app
